so folks uh we're talking about
communism
now this is an interesting topic this is
a topic i've been kind of thinking about
reading about and seeing certainly a
resurgence well at least with my the the
channels that i
am tapped into i'm seeing a resurgence
in i guess i would say like the mains
not even the mainstreaming of it but it
seems like
you know there was a time in the 80s
whatever where tommy and communist and
before that as well it's just this very
like you don't want to be that it's a
bad thing
slowly over time it's like i don't know
what it is exactly but it seems like the
general view on the on the concept is
really softened and now with
a lot that's going on in the world i'm
seeing a lot of like i guess
reinvigoration of people being
interested
in these ideas and i suspect a lot of
them don't quite understand exactly what
the historical
factors are and what it actually all
leads to or has led to in many cases
stuff so
i kind of want to just um talk about
some basics
because i feel like you have a lot more
to say about communism and i'm pretty
interested in the topic so
can we just start with the basics and
like can you tell
me and these other folks in here from
your perspective
can you summarize communism into
fairly simple terms as if you're
explaining this to like a teenager
sure and i'm happy to do so i just say
uh in case there are any communists or
people who consider themselves
communists watching this
you know i do have a human heart i can
sympathize
with their reason for being communists
um
even though i am about to explain to you
why communism is bad and evil and wrong
um there's a documentary right now on
netflix
about a cult group and i haven't seen
the documentary but in the promo for it
what they
mention again and again is that the
reason people had for joining this cult
the reason they had it for believing in
this cult was that they wanted to make
the world a better place
they were trying to do good and so the
particular cult is called nexium
i've heard that a lot from people who
joined scientology
and then scientology destroyed their
lives so a lot of people
go into these movements with genuinely
good intentions
it doesn't mean it's a good movement it
doesn't mean what they did afterward was
good
so i'm not impugning i'm not insulting
anyone's intentions
even if some of you have literally
signed up for and joined
you know communist parties i know the
types of intentions people had when they
first got involved
and in the case of my own parents
obviously they were old enough that they
remembered
world war ii and the vietnam war totally
different political context
they in their own minds had good
intentions
but that led to them making excuses for
terrible evil things
the beginning of the story with
communism is before karl marx
communism existed as a concept and a
movement
prior to the career of marx and engels
although marx is such a huge influence
that
we almost never talk about communism as
it existed before karl marx
in the period before karl marx actually
a lot of the people who call themselves
communists and communards
were devout christians they were people
who believed in refusing money
and a lot of them were actually
influenced by a very famous book by
thomas moore
called thomas moore's utopia thomas
smith's utopia is one of the most
influential books in the history of
western civilization
and like you know if you haven't read it
you've read other authors who were
influenced by it
now i would mention thomas more's utopia
was
even influential in japan it was even
influential
in communist china over mao zedong
himself
now thomas more zootopia concludes
with a condemnation of money
that the fundamental problem with
society is
money itself that if we could have a
society without money we would have a
paradise
and there were many different communist
theorists
i'm saying theorists here because i'm
really talking about people who wrote
books not the people who actually
started communes who are also
interesting
and most of those people were crazy
christian fundamentalists just like
today like there were people who went
away and said okay i'm going to start an
ideal community
they were all almost all spiritually
guided people but the people who were
uh in the city writing books publishing
calling for
revolution and and profound economic
change
um a lot of them shared
this apprehension that somehow
money itself was the root of all evil
karl marx takes the decisive step of
saying the problem is not
money the problem is money
creating money which he terms capital
so marx's concept of capital of capital
investment is that you reach a point in
the development of society
where the ruling class the rich people
are no longer
farmers they're no longer soldiers like
in a
dark ages sense or the roman empire or
something
but that the rich people amass money and
through things like the stock market
through investment and through gaining
interest in the bank
money seemingly just produces more money
and that this is the root of all evil
um so okay
most fundamentally then from the
beginning
even before karl marx you know
what is communism communism in principle
is a rejection of economic reality for
some other ideal
and that's why so many of the people
involved are very idealistic
they may be christian they may be you
know jewish muslim or what have you
generally the impulse that unites
communists together is the idea of
couldn't we just reject all of the
cultural assumptions of our society
couldn't we just go into the countryside
and get some land and start farming
and start out on our own start it all
over again and people do that
you can live in a cave you can start
your own farm
and you start to encounter step by step
all the facts of economics that
communists wanted to ignore
you can make your own shoes for everyone
living on your commune
to have handmade shoes using materials
and labor
within your commune isn't 10 times more
expensive
than shoes from a factory in china it's
not 100 times more expensive
it's a thousand times more expensive now
you've got a commune that refuses to buy
anything and refuses to use money
and your children have no shoes you know
so
you know how does your commune provide
health care or so on and so forth
if you do this step by step you're going
to start learning the real facts of
economics
that all the non-marxist and
non-communist thinkers have
have embraced so this is a short
and i think fairly sympathetic uh
description of communism
the less sympathetic reality is that
marx
invented and profounded this tenet
pardon me
tenet this axiom that all social
progress
all change is accomplished through
violence and
his philosophy his path to communism his
path to
progress unlike even other theorists who
were alive
during the same generation with marx was
to say that it's only through violence
and then it's only specifically through
the violence of the lower social class
destroying the upper social class that
history can progress
and all kinds of other wacky ideas have
spread it up around that including the
fundamental hostility to democracy it
doesn't make a whole lot of sense
so out of that we get with various steps
in between
the reality of modern communism which is
still here with us on youtube today
unchanged that what they need to do is
form a vanguard
fight a revolution kill the rich etc etc
this is the unbelievably ugly reality of
communism
again you see on twitch you see on
youtube you see everywhere
and it's important to keep in mind that
contrast wait a minute guys
didn't this start with us as teenagers
thinking we could go in the countryside
and buy a plot of land and start farming
and
make our own shoes and not have to use
money didn't this start with i mean
today
people don't read thomas morris utopia
they don't need more centuries ago they
did
but didn't this start with some kind of
utopian ideal in that sense in thomas
moore's utopia
that we can do better than the society
we can get rid of the greed and
oppression of the society
and then you have the unbelievably
oppressive and terrible reality
not just of what communism is as a as a
government but
what communist revolutionary movements
are in 2020 here and now
all right let me uh interesting let me
uh i want to kind of
feed that back to you a bit through my
own filter and let me and i want you to
let me know if you think i'm getting
stuff wrong or why won't you return to
stay with us
so is it from my perspective both from
what you're saying just from my previous
understanding of it
communism is a response to bad
conditions
generally right it's like communism
wouldn't have come up if utopia already
existed
as you just you're kind of describing it
with this book as having sort of utopian
roots and maybe even not beyond roots
it's it seems to be
a utopian philosophy was it would you
say that's correct yes
yeah and the the very earliest phases of
communism
which still to this day communists go
back to is the contrast between
athens and sparta this is still
still the is in marx but in general
you're going to find it in marxland and
stalin you're going to find in all kinds
you're going to find it even in the
critics of communism talking about
communism as the new
sparta the idea
that sparta was a society with no money
where nobody ever touched money or
nobody ever bought things
is completely false it's a fiction
but it was a widely believed fiction and
the idea that whereas
athens had democracy but it was a
society built on commerce and greed
and democracy it was kind of the
capitalist democracy
but that sparta represented something
pure
um uncontaminated by the use of gold
coins and this kind of thing
that there was this alternative way to
build a society
i don't think any of them would quite
say sparta was a utopia
but it is a utopian way of thinking
about sparta and that's still with us
yeah
so that that contrast
amazingly has for more than 2000 years
come up again and again
it's been reinvented again and again
yeah
okay so so it's a response to bad
conditions
so another thing i want to mention for
people who don't know hey all kinds of
people who are communists here on
youtube live in wonderful conditions i
don't even
i don't even presume that i mean people
are leaving living happy bourgeois lives
um in california and they become
communists there are people in
switzerland who become communists
so no i think that idealism can appeal
to people who are born rich it can
can appeal to all kinds of people sure
okay but wouldn't wouldn't that if those
people that are
say born rich that are sympathetic with
communism wouldn't that
spring from a sense of
solidarity or empathy for those people
that are under bad conditions generally
isn't it usually like somehow connected
to that so great great question and i
say i'm not trying to demonize anyone
here
um one of the major leaders of the uh
cambodian communist party who went on
trial um recently he went on trial just
a few years
during my lifetime um you know uh
his name was pronounced deutsch
okay great so comrade deutsch as he's
remembered
you know when he was asked why did you
decide in the first place to become a
communist
he gave the most honest answer you're
ever going to hear he had a bad week
where he confessed to a girl that he was
in love with her
she'd been something like a classmate
she'd been somebody known for a long
time
and she laughed at him and rejected his
advances
and his bicycle was stolen and he was
standing there
with his bike lock or whatever his
bicycle used to be he was standing there
looking for his
stolen bicycle and he thought this
society is bad and evil and wrong
there's got to be a better way
and he packed up and left the city and
joined the communist party
which at that time meant he joined armed
rebels with
guns in the jungle and he ended up you
know torturing people to death for the
regime as you as you may know he went on
to commit
terrible atrocities for that regime so
you know i'm not saying that's a
ridicule everyone
a lot of us will know what it's like to
have their bicycle still won
be rejected by a girl you've got a got a
crush on
um you know obviously my own parents
provide them with a case study
but i mean their reasons for embracing
communism i see as very human
in this sense and and to be
self-critical like my reasons why i got
involved with buddhism
would be would be very human in the same
way you know i i
i do sympathize with those reasons but
put it this way
i think absolutely nobody gets involved
in communism
because they in a detached way read karl
marx's economic theories
and think this is the way to help the
poor nobody in their right mind could do
that
you'd be much more likely to join the
catholic church if you wanted to help
the poor
and i say that as someone who who is not
catholic and doesn't support the
catholic church
so i had this this is a little anecdote
but i had a friend really close friend
of mine who briefly
this is ages ago when i didn't really
even have an opinion but i remember him
sort of talking about communism and he
was in a really bad place like his job
was terrible and he was
just really frustrated with society and
i remember that was the moment i never
heard him talk about it after but there
was just like a week or something where
i heard him talking about it
just thinking like wouldn't it be great
if this and this and this and we all had
the same thing we all
when we're all getting enough to
struggle so like that's kind of how i've
always identified it as
in general obviously there's exceptions
all over the place but in general that
communism is attractive to people that
are disenfranchised with
things like capitalism and just the
state of society and for that reason
it's
not as common for somebody who's let's
say comfortable in life to
really identify with this well i'd say
it depends on what kind of ego you've
got
when you believe in something like
communism and
those in the islands can think about how
many other kind of hippie beliefs today
are like this also
all of a sudden you believe in this
secret magical truth
that makes you feel superior to your own
school teachers
that makes you feel superior to your
boss at work that makes you feel
superior to your own parents and
grandparents
you you get it and they don't really get
it man
they don't really know what's going on
a lot of conspiracy theory thinking is
like this so that can be extremely
appealing to the ego
again depending on what kind of
character you are
in my father's case um you could say he
was a failed
actor or he was someone who had a very
small amount of success as an actor he
did earn his living as an actor for a
couple of years
he cared a lot about getting attention
from women
good reason to be an actor by the way
don't do it for the money you know
he cared a lot about being important and
being the center of attention
and immediately before my father became
this extreme communist
he was a christian extremist he had
apparent of being a so-called christian
existentialist preacher
so there are some people who will switch
from one
cult belief to another because
that cult belief serves the same
function
for their ego right like hey you know do
you want to know what it is to be saved
you know here's this preacher who's
going to tell you how things really are
the secrets of the universe the
afterlife whatever it is
they have the invisible key that unlocks
these mysteries you've never understood
communism really does that for people
and i think that's exactly why
it's having a resurgence now when in
every other way it's been totally
discredited
so just give really short example i mean
you asked about this kind of thing
earlier
when i was a kid my parents presented
communism to me and i just assumed oh so
communists have a better way of
organizing
farms i was very interested in farming
not worth saying why
and like the minute i went to the
library and got a book explaining how
farms were organized in the soviet union
is this a joke like this is much
much worse and by the way these books
were pro-communist these were not
these are not like indictments otherwise
like this is
unbelievably worse than the way
agriculture is organized in canada
england france italy or you name it like
you know so there's this promise that
this is the secret to the universe but
if we ever
look at just empirical reality how farms
work
why people were starving to death in in
communist countries
and even when they weren't starving that
the farming system was you know really
more awful than feudalism
um you know that puts the lie to that
optimism
but it appeals to human optimism and
appeals to this kind of ego trip
letting you feel that you're superior to
your own school teachers
okay so lychee's in the chat a little
while back was kind of asking for
some clarity on uh this definition
because it's a hard thing to pin down
uh what communism is and i think there's
also like a lot of the stuff it's an
element of subjectivity so we're
interpreting it to a degree
but one of the questions she asked is
about the differentiation
between personal uh and private property
from what i understand and i'll let you
explain this because i'm sure you know
more about this particular thing
my understanding is that communism is
intrinsically against private property
yeah yeah that's that is true um
you know marxism per se
basically says i mean marxism is a more
narrow category than communism there are
many types of communism but
marxist orthodox communism basically
says that what they want to take away
is ownership of the means of production
a term you're going to hear a lot if
you're getting into communism
so that would mean ownership of the
machines that are used in assembling a
car
ownership of the factory ownership of
the farmland
ownership of the tractors that are on
but individual people can still own toys
for their children they can still own
clothing for themselves
it's not a total prohibition on uh on
owning tangible things in your own home
it's not quite as monastic as that with
that having been said though
any group of communists who are really
serious and sincere
about getting rid of money entirely they
pretty much do
eliminate anything you can own and
cambodia is a great example of that i
mean really in cambodia
nobody owned anything um the the extent
of the poverty people were
reduced to it's it was kind of as close
as
maybe as close as we've come in the 20th
century to people
not owning anything aside from the
clothes on their back the kind of
omni slavery where almost everybody
except the leadership of the communist
party
was was really in a state of slavery
yeah
so i think a lot of people probably
myself included or at least
in the past more so kind of have a hard
time understanding the differences
between like marxism
and leninism and communism and socialism
and all these things and maybe let's not
get into that because it's such a huge
topic
but just to let's just make it clear
that we're we kind of have to generalize
a bit i think when we're talking about
this stuff like you've kind of mentioned
like
strict marxist communism these other
things but could do you think you could
somewhat succinctly explain marxism
versus communism versus
socialism uh sure
okay so let's do them in the reverse
order
socialism is about debating
where we draw the line between the
public sector and the private sector
so in some countries right now if you
pick up
a phone and make a phone call many
countries around the world the actual
phone service is provided by the
government
so this is to say the government
actually built the wires
that connect your phone call to other
people you are using a government
service you may even get a phone bill
from the government or it could be
providing you for free in many countries
around the world
you may be getting electricity provided
to you by the government you'll be
getting water
health care many many things are in the
public sector sphere
and let's be clear public means
government
that's what it means so it's kind of a
euphemism to say public sector instead
of government sector
or state sector or another really blunt
term is the command
economy all right now why is it command
because ultimately it tends to resemble
the way the military is run
if the government has its own
electricity company
it's not that different from working for
the military working for the
government's electricity company as
opposed to working for a private company
so uh again within canada even within
the last 50 years a lot of those things
have shifted around
what things are uh public utilities
government what things
so socialism fundamentally and simply is
a debate
about where do you draw that line
communism really by definition
means that you want to draw the line as
far as possible to one side of the chart
as far as possible to the left
i guess you could say so that almost
nothing is private sector no again as i
just mentioned
marxists will say hey you can still own
clothes you can still own toys for your
kids you can still
do stuff in your private life but um
they would not a communist by definition
does not want
private ownership of a car factory
attractor
anything like that so when you start
with the definition of socialism
now so right now in the united states of
america a socialist like bernie sanders
is saying hey he wants to move the line
so the whole health care system becomes
government
it's now debatable i'm not going to get
into the details of exactly what bernie
sanders is promising because
anyway that is probably the reality of
what bernie sanders promises even if he
doesn't doesn't
really say that and you know fair enough
many countries in europe they have moved
the line where
you know the you know health care is a
government service
and then to see communism is putting the
line all the way over um
and then i think you know very simply
you know karl marx is just one author
but he is the single most influential
author you know in
in the development of modern communism i
mean you know
who today is really talking about uh
louis auguste blanchi so louis auguste
blanchi
while karl marx was alive he said
they are the real communists that
blanchy
and his followers they were the real
communists unlike
karl marx and angles that they weren't
real communists it's an interesting
quote
so there were other communist leaders
with other ideas about
about communism and who were also going
out and making revolution louis gaspunki
he spent a lot of his time in prison
and he ended up dead but i guess all of
us do eventually anyway
uh so there were other names there were
other people you can read
but the the significant footnote about
karl marx
is that he presented himself as an
economist
and what he has to say about economics
is just horseshit
i think that's a relatively succinct
answer
okay interesting so i wanna can i give
you i wanna like kind of
give give like a breakdown of my
understanding of
what happened with the russian
revolution as just like a case study
to what happens with communist
revolutions and i want to get your
perspective
if i'm summarized if you think of
summarizing it accurately i think i'm
missing something
because this thing i've been pretty
interested in lately the russian
revolution
so like my my general and it seems like
this is
parallel to other revolutions communist
revolutions that have happened similar
sort of outcomes have occurred
but my understanding is that it's it
starts with
discontent and in russia it was sort of
the oligarchy
i think you would say just sort of the
ruling the powers of the bee at the time
which
were it was like a monarchy and mixed
with some sort of uh
pretty uh totalitarian government i
think and they
we didn't have a lot of freedom you
weren't allowed to practice politics
openly for example all these
restrictions it was a very repressive
society a lot of reason to
look for a utopian ideal and then slowly
this
com this karl marx stuff and the
communism started bubbling up
and the idea was look at these
capitalists and these rulers being such
[ __ ]
we need to take them down and then and
then we take them down and take down the
system of capitalism
we'll be able to figure out something
better than it will
even though we don't have all the
background and all the systems and
everything set up in place
we'll be able to create everything new
more or less we'll do it better
surely and then they were able to
convince people of that
they were able to sort of violently do
that and take over more or less
and then once they did all these utopian
ideals were sort of
put like they were forced to like okay
now you got to actually do all these
things that you were
talking about and that's where things
went to absolute horror
because it turned out that they did not
have these abilities and so led to sort
of administrative administrative
catastrophe let's say
all of these multitudes of examples
famines and what have you
various classes were demonized murdered
and all these things and replaced with
less competent people which led to sort
of long-term
economic and human catastrophe
and similar sort of stuff has happened
in other countries that's so that's just
my brief understanding of
it's really summarized of russia and
again i think it parallels a lot of
other sort of communist revolutions that
i've
looked at but i wonder am i getting
stuff wrong from your perspective yeah
i i would disagree with the first
chapter of what you said in terms of the
origins
i don't think we disagree much with the
disaster that comes after in chapters
four five and six or whatever but maybe
the first three chapters i would
disagree with you about
um in many many ways the decades leading
up to the revolution
were a very optimistic time in russia
the sense in which they were not an
optimistic time
can be summarized with one word war
so russia was involved in a series of
really terrible wars actually you know
what
keeping all the way real war and
genocide
so there's genocide going on too which
is kind of another story
but with the significant exception of
war and genocide
it was a period of tremendous optimism
about the future
and keep in mind
the world was a small place it wasn't
difficult
for russians to go back and forth
between their own rather backward
country and places like germany and
france
and they really could see how quickly
they could catch up with
where western europe was already at and
the technology
the pace of technological change was
tremendous at that time
russia also had this unimaginably
enormous
empire stretching all the way east of
vladivostok and beyond
we never forget that a land border with
japan and so on
you know so no there was a time of of
tremendous optimism in many many ways
and you could even say that optimism led
into
uh the transition to communism however
they had a problem with losing wars
and at that time the main war they were
losing
was the one with the germans but they
also had war with poland and
many other um aggressors uh
certainly their problems with japan
never ended
until the end of world war ii so they
had war with japan they had war with
they had wars to control korea with
china it was this enormous empire
you know they had wars about um the
control of uh
alaska and hawaii there were russian
counties and why this is an unbelievable
world empire that's forgotten
um that russia really i'm you know i'm
not glorifying it but yeah the british
empire took over a lot of the world with
the russian empire
they took over a lot of the world in
that period also and indeed part of that
optimism just to keep in mind it just
has to do with things like the discovery
of electricity you know
just say it's not that they invented it
but society was changing and modernizing
in this in this inspirational way
and the russians saw the way in which
they could approve you could say some of
these same things about
japan during the springtime in terms of
optimism um
what you can never forget is this
before the bolsheviks took over
there were elections and the bolsheviks
lost so even wikipedia will give you the
election results so there was all this
optimism
they deposed the royal family of the
tsar
and then they had this transition
relatively peaceful transition
considering they were at war
continuously during this time
they had this transition to having
democracy elections and a parliament
and the winner of the elections
was called the socialist revolutionary
party they were a far left party
but not as extreme as the bolsheviks
not violent communists not insane
marxists
they were socialists and you can tell
from the name they weren't even
moderate socialists they were far left
socialists
the whole history of russia would be
different
if lenin vladimir ilyich lenin
could have just accepted his role as one
of the minority parties in politics
and sat in parliament and gave speeches
and debated what the future of russia
could be
but that's not what they did the
bolsheviks
hunted down and murdered every single
member of parliament they hunted down
and murdered
everyone who voted to support the
socialist revolutionary party
who were a very large percentage of the
population the
unbelievable violence of what's normally
referred to as the russian civil war
rather than the russian revolution
really it's the same thing or two
periods of time and the same thing
um that violence is so extreme
because the elections proved the vast
majority of the population were
anti-bolshevik they were against the
bolsheviks
even though they did they were
optimistic in general about left-wing
ideas of
making rapid progress of having some
kind of change in society
what they wanted was to have a
pluralistic
socialist democracy similar to the ones
they were familiar with at that time
already
in western europe and that's not what
they got
instead they got the dictatorship of
lenin lenin gets shot in the head
um he doesn't die right away from being
shot in the head but he knows his days
are numbered he's never really the same
again after he gets shot in the head
lennon writes his will and you know the
next guy in the commander's seat is
stalin
and stalin is so terrible that people
seem to remember lenin as if he wasn't
too terribly bad
but in fact lenin was absolutely
unbelievably terrible too
so yeah that's my way of telling the
story and i mean the the big difference
is putting the emphasis on that
on that election and the election tells
you a lot about communism
and the way in which it is based on the
refusal
to accept the vote of 50 or 51
of the population and it's accepting the
violence of having a small minority
force everyone else into a totalitarian
system run by communists
so me and you know the sort of aftermath
i don't know
who's watching right now but for those
who don't once this
regime stalin and his regime sort of
took over so the bolsheviks for those
who don't know bolsheviks was that was
the party the
at the time that took over eventually
bolsheviks became just the communist
party i believe
uh yes yeah they continued using both
terms but yeah sure bolsheviks are the
commerce party yeah sure
so like a lot of horrible things happen
but i mean like
one of the biggest ones was was the um
collectivization of agriculture
so there was this no correctness wrong
here but there was this notion that they
needed to like
jump forward technologically and that
the way to do that was let's
collectivize
all agriculture in russia let's kind of
put all the farms together essentially
and
control them like from the top down
rather than them having independence
and so that was the plan and then the
way that they enforced that was to
single out somewhat competent profitable
farmers and murder and torture them and
replace them with less competent people
leading to an atrocious famine where
hundreds of millions
tens of millions if not 100 mil i don't
know the exact numbers but many many
millions of people
starved to death and many millions of
people nearly starved to death and had
all kinds of consequences after and it's
really one of the most grotesque things
i've ever
read about or heard about um and yet
nobody seems to know about it in
just modern day canada and america
so what i'm leading to well for me to
start there did i get anything
horrendous again oh wait
so i agree i think we agree on chapters
four five and six
we agree with that stuff yeah by the way
i didn't disagree with
i know i know it was it was really like
a lack of community because i guess
sure no it's a huge challenge to
summarize something this enormous is a
huge challenge and
i i don't think anyone else summarizes
it the same way i summarize i have total
respect for you go on yeah
okay so that that i've read the
gulag archipelago and i've read a bunch
of stuff about that era
it's about the famine and ukraine and
all these other things and it's it's
haunted for
i've read a while ago and i've sort of
been re getting into this topic with the
stalin biography that i've been reading
and it really like resonated with me and
kind of horrified me
initially just that it happened and now
i'm getting a little
i guess like do you see any pair what
i'm getting to is do you see any
parallels
to that that russian revolution and the
events preceding it
to what's going on in america right now
and do you think it's do you think i'm
reaching to have a sort of abstract
concern that some other kind of hostile
takeover with
horrendous ramifications could be
you know the differences are certainly
more striking than the similarities
what what's most troubling to me about
the united states of america
is that we've got another period of
history in which people seem to think
that being
right is the only thing that matters um
so in other words people put a lot of
emphasis on moral superiority
rather than say having a pragmatic
attitude to talking a problem through
and looking at different approaches and
trying them out and seeing what works
so what you've just said about
transforming agriculture
in russia if you had
you know 50 people in a room and you
just sort of asked okay what do you
think we can do
to transform agriculture in russia and
you got some suggestions
and then you had a pragmatic attitude
like okay well let's try that on a
couple of farms and let's try that in a
couple of farms
and let's meet up again in six months
and talk about how it's going
and this thing's not work like you know
improving
agriculture doesn't have to involve
mass murder like it's it's so it's so
mind-blowingly obvious and you could say
a stable improving education or
something
but there's a tyrannical attitude
that begins with i'm morally right
i'm morally superior to everyone else in
the room anyone who's going to question
my judgment and my decision on this
deserves to even be
imprisoned or tortured and so on and
then that proceeds from there
logically and takes what might be a kind
of harmless
idea about how to improve improve
agriculture
and enslaves and ruins the lives of
enormous numbers of people you know
force them to do this in a in a
tyrannical way
and i i just say i mean i'm using
agriculture as an example because it's
so banal
it's so it's so boring it's so
uninteresting there's nothing dramatic
about improving agriculture it doesn't
have to be this way
um i would say the only thing or the
main thing i can see that americans in
2020 have in common
uh with the revolutionaries of that era
is this sense that what matters is my
personal moral superiority
is that i'm right and that my being
right
entitles me to um you know
a kind of carte blanche um
totalitarian agenda i do think that's a
widespread sentiment
uh in american culture and i would say
you even see that in things like the
approach to global warming
you know the people once who have
adopted this attitude that they're
morally superior because they're trying
to save the world and you're not
i see that playing out but otherwise i
think there were very very few
similarities one that i draw people's
tension because you can forget it
almost all of the extreme protests we've
seen
implicitly amount to protesters
demanding that the government solve
their problem for them
saying we want the government to do this
we want the government we want the
government to do a better job
that's fundamentally unrevolutionary you
know what's revolutionary
is when you get out and solve the
problem for yourself and say you don't
need the government
it's much more dangerous you know so i
don't see anyone in the political
spectrum
you know in any significant numbers left
right or center
who are doing anything other than
complaining and expecting the government
to solve their problems for them
uh and to give a really simple example
you know drug addiction
so people sometimes protest they want
the government to do this or that about
drug addiction when people start
just doing it when people are saying hey
we know the solution drug addiction
we're gonna we're gonna do it we don't
need the police
that's revolutionary and that's that's
more dangerous
interesting so the the uh the other side
of this
issue for me because i've i i felt like
uh especially at reading i'm
literally reading about the russian
revolution right now and stalin taking
power and all this stuff like that so
it's on my mind and i'm drawing these
parallels but i'm also really
questioning these parallels
and i've also been noticing that a lot
of
uh let's say republicans or whatever
are talking about communism as the new
as like another boogeyman basically
where i'm like i'm just seeing different
things where people are like oh the
democrats are communists they're going
to take a kind of like an extreme
version of what i was just sort of
mildly
proposing could be a concern whatever
but i'm seeing it sort of being talked
about like
and and i'm wondering do you think that
that thing that i described the
you know the parallel that somebody
might draw do you think that that could
be
used as a sort of way of weaponizing or
sort of weaponizing communism as a way
of like demonizing the left
from the the right they could go oh you
guys better not watch out for these
activists on the right they're going to
you know it's going to be like russia
all over again whatever do you feel like
that's a narrative that could be
pushed forward uh so you know i saw a
video recently on sargon of akkad's
youtube channel i very rarely look at
sargon of a cad
and he was in exactly this way
demonizing
the far left as as if they were already
an
armed revolutionary force um taking over
the government this kind of thing so it
was it was exactly the type of thing
you've described without repeating what
you've just said
you could call it red baiting or
fear-mongering about the far left
and the example he gave to prove his
point a quote from a live stream
i think it was on twitch of a group of
these communists who are
pretty famous on on youtube
it was four people talking while playing
the massively multiplayer online game
fall guys and not body shaming anyone
here
but these were fat lazy
people playing a video game and you know
chatting
over live chat while they were doing it
and yes there was some revolutionary
rhetoric in there but it's like sargon
i think you're kind of missing the
forest for the trees here
like the main thing to recognize is that
these are
fat lazy video game addicted people
who are sitting around saying stuff that
reinforces their own sense of moral
superiority
and what i've just said about the far
left you could say about so many people
on the far right
you know people on the far right they're
playing video games too they're smoking
marijuana too
they're doing cocaine and sleeping with
prostitutes and living this life of
total
self-indulgence um you know like i
mentioned you know
part of what made cambodia so violent is
just that
buddhist background and to come back to
deut
whose story you've already known comrade
doy he went on to torture
huge numbers of people that was his job
he was a full-time professional
torturer what do you want to say you
know
when he made that decision somebody
stole his bicycle and he thought that's
the last straw he's gonna go and join
the revolution
he came from a cultural background and
personal background where he thought
he could put on a backpack and walk
barefoot into the jungle
and really live with personal hardship
really sleep under a mosquito net you
know
and i have some experience in that
climate in those jungles
sleeping under a mosquito now i remember
a friend of mine who was a buddhist monk
said uh what white people don't
understand
is that the forest is not quiet here
there's the noise of wild animals all
night
you know the animals are really active
through the night and the tropics you
know
but you know just that kind of
resolution just that image of being a
man who's willing to go and live in a
cave
you know that did that did draw on the
buddhist
background and i'm not saying it's a
good thing i mean it's part of why it
was so bound to so extreme
the people i see whether on the left or
the right
um you know they're soft
and they're soft because they're the
video games they're addicted to drugs
this is their life this is who they
really are
i don't put that on as like a footnote i
think that's
integral to who they are and um
that makes a lot of those debates you
know just seem kind of silly and
ridiculous
i'm not honest okay so
that kind of leads me to the next
question which uh is
kind of about like i mean there's so
many different issues going on right now
um big issue like you know we don't even
the election there are things all these
all these kind of like talking points in
relation to it healthcare and
a million different things that are a
lot of people are talking about and i
feel like it's
hard for the average person to
distinguish which of these issues are
important and which of these are just
kind of like
once there's like pr just people kind of
inserting things into the narrative that
are into the news cycle or whatever that
so i wonder from your perspective you
know we've kind of just identified
in your in your opinion the far left
extremists let's say
aren't you don't consider them to be too
much of a threat due to their
general softness um what do you think is
a threat like what
what are you concerned about of all
these things going on what do you sort
of prioritize as like one of the major
issues that you
you're kind of looking at with a bit of
a worry yeah so
look uh this would be a great one to do
as a final question because this this is
perfect this perfectly brings us back to
like the first questions you asked me
what i'm worried about is stasis what
i'm worried about is complacency
what i'm worried about is conformities
and what i'm worried about is the
perpetuation of the status quo
um so i have friends who ask me this
kind of question and some of them kind
of ask me like what do you think the
worst case scenario is if trump
gets reelected and i sit back for me the
worst case scenario is that everything
stays the same
for me because i said the very beginning
i am a dissident
i am a radical in many ways i'm more
radical than bernie sanders i'm not
a status quo person politically i'm just
a very pragmatic down to earth person
i'm not an idealist i'm not an ideologue
but the kind of pragmatic change i want
is connected to my profound
dissatisfaction with the site so like
just to just to give like a really brief
example because it may seem too abstract
like some people complain university is
a rip-off
very common very comfortable right i am
someone
who is not just complaining when i say
university is a rip-off university is an
experience
at the core of the formation of people's
identity
in the society they're putting them on
their career path
it changes people's lives and i see the
university system as something that is
changing people's lives
for the worse that it's kind of
bankrupting society as a whole that is
making beggars of us all
like yeah i i think the university
system is a ripoff
but i really want to do something about
it i don't want to just smoke marijuana
and play video games right i mean
it may seem shallow but if you really
actually want to change the education
system
when you really actually want to change
the world then you start to become a
dissident
so for me the the greatest greatest
danger is that nothing changes when i
did an evaluation
this is now four years ago something
like that three and a half years ago
when i did an evaluation of the trump
tax cuts there were all these left-wing
people
who were saying that the trump tax cuts
were so terrible there was such an
economic disaster that was going to
bring about the downfall
of american democracy and i did the math
you know i have a background in both
political science and economics and
looking at the numbers
i said nope that's wishful thinking
the trump tax cuts they're bad but
they're not bad enough to change
anything
like you can have the trump tax cuts and
everything can keep on going
the same way it's been before people do
this same kind of wishful thinking um
about climate change that somehow
we're facing a crisis so grave so
profound so
obvious that it's going to force a
radical transformation of society people
the same thing i talked about this
recently with veganism
and your health like oh the health
effects of eating meat and
drinking milk are so bad that it's gonna
force this transformation of society
no nothing's gonna force it society is
gonna change
when people are positively motivated to
make a change and no
sooner we can go on having one [ __ ]
you know uh president after another you
know
bill clinton george w bush obama trump
we can go on bombing afghanistan
forever and never go bankrupt and never
improve democracy and never learn the
lessons of history it is totally
possible to sustain the iraq war and the
afghanistan war
and the current levels of deficit
spending forever and ever
it's the revolution isn't gonna happen
by itself
like there aren't some there isn't some
powerful force that's gonna transform
our society
you and i we now watching this youtube
video
we have to make the change why did the
french revolution happen
a revolution that the communists rarely
claim some do
why did the french revolution happen
right didn't happen because of poverty
right the the so-called poor people in
paris
were the most privileged people in all
of france france itself was the
wealthiest
most opulent country in all of europe
economically everything was going great
the french empire was doing
better and better the french revolution
happened in the way that it did
when it did because people actually had
new ideas they actually had new ideas
and aspirations
to make a better society you know
and some disasters ensued and some
massacres ensued
but yeah you know people get new ideas
they get motivated to make the world a
better place
and then things change you know
something something happens
in reality you know the constitution of
canada
was written during my lifetime what's
called the the patriation
of the constitution it's not some
ancient document
people look up to as something sacred
and hallowed the way americans do in
france
their constitution was written after
world war ii but we have these
deeply conformist attitudes that nothing
can change that no better society is
possible
not even to the extent of being willing
to look at
denmark and switzerland you know look
it's
it's already radical to say hey we have
something we can really learn from
denmark we could do something better
to look at these examples or japan or
taiwan and say hey there's something we
can learn
from other countries and other cultures
we really can fundamentally do better
for our citizens
and we can do to better people so no for
me you know the
the greatest threat to the status quo is
just the continuation of the status quo
um we can have another president like
george w bush or like obama
who fundamentally changes nothing at all
you can't look at the systems we have in
place right now whether parliament
or united states congress to bring about
this kind of change we have to look to
ourselves and by my own definition as
i've already said
that does make me a radical that does
make me a distant that does make me
someone
who is perhaps a little bit more
dangerous
than bernie sanders
that doesn't have to be the last
question if you want to end it there
it's great or if you want to switch
topics i'm happy to talk about anything
at all